---
layout: post
title:  "/bin/init"
author: Stan Drozd
date:   2017-02-15 8:00:00 +0100
categories:
published: true
tags: dsp17 init start welcome introduction machine learning linux kernel
---

```shell
$ install -m 777 goals/blog reality/ # Everything is possible!
```

I've decided to take part in the 2017 edition of the [Daj Się
Poznać][dajsiepoznac] ("Get Noticed") competition. With this blog I hope to
learn me the secrets of Machine Learning and Data Science using Python and C++.
By writing everything down into a tutorial I want to teach **You** about all
that as well.

`Will you make this trip with me? (Y/n)`

# 2017-02-25 Edit: A change in direction
The realm of Machine Learning is a vast collection of knowledge that grows
really fast. It managed to surface itself in pop culture and prove useful in
everyday tasks.

As much as I admire the field and am willing to master it, my lack of expertise
(especially in C++) might hurt the educational value of the tutorial. Going with
just Python on the other hand would simply make it yet another bunch of
(possibly erroneous) text on tools which already have tons of helpful content
created around them.

Being a C developer, I think I'll be able to deliver more informed content when
armed with a language that I know well while, at the same time, proving myself
through work with a challenging, highly technical topic.

For that reason I made the call to switch the main track of this blog to Linux
Kernel Development - an interesting, somewhat cryptic craft with a low-level
twist, which can give you a whole new point of view on the whole operating
systems biz. Looks like a favorable outcome, no?

:boy: :book: :penguin: :boom: :nerd_face:

[dajsiepoznac]: http://dajsiepoznac.pl
