---
layout: post
title: "DSP-17 #2.1: Easy X11 keybindings with xbindkeys"
author: Stan Drozd
date: 2017-03-17 8:00:00 +0100
categories: dsp17
excerpt: "A toddler could set this up!"
tags: dsp17 xbindkeys config tutorial
---
Ever wanted to bind some command to a key or mouse button of your choosing? Yes?
Good, because that's what I'm going to show you in this tutorial. The whole
thing is very straightforward, so the list of things needed is rather short:
* **A system with X11** - The stuff I'm showing here should generally work on
  any X11-based graphical environment
* **xbindkyes** - For actual execution of your mapped commands
* **xautomation** - For simulating key presses from the console; provides `xte`

Both `xbindkeys` and `xautomation` should be available in your OS's
repositories.

# Defining xbindkeys configs
`xbindkeys` will look for your mappings in a file named `.xbindkeysrc` in your
home directory. The syntax of `xbindkeys` is pretty simple with each binding
definition being just two lines:

```conf
# execute some_command whenever a "some + three + keys" shortcut is pressed
"some_command"
    some + three + keys
```

You can also activate your mappings on key release events by adding an extra
`Release` key to your combination:

```conf
# Say "Caps Lock enabled!" on CapsLock release
"espeak 'Caps Lock enabled!'"
    Caps_Lock + Release
```

# But I don't know what my key is called!
Fear not, `xbindkeys` has you covered. Just run `xbindkeys -k`, focus on the
window created by the program and press the key you want to map. If you want to
capture more than one, use `xbindkeys -mk`. Here's a sample
output for the gesture button on my Logitech MX Master mouse:
```plaintext
$ xbindkeys -k
Press combination of keys or/and click under the window.
You can use one of the two lines after "NoCommand"
in $HOME/.xbindkeysrc to bind a key.
"(Scheme function)"
    m:0x1c + c:172
    Control+Alt+Mod2 + Tab
```
*Huh, it seems to just send* `Ctrl+Alt+Tab`! :upside_down_face:

Both lines below `"(Scheme function)"` refer to the very same key combination -
just choose whichever you like more.

> :information_source: Note:
>
> `Mod2` means "Modifier 2" and basically refers to Num Lock. You can safely
> omit it when copying the key to your config.

With your key name no longer being a secret, you can use it to define your own
mapping rules in the format I described above.

# Example
My own key mapping needs aren't too big. The `~/.xbindkeysrc` I'm using covers
only some media keys and screenshot bindings, making it a simple example:

```conf
# The dbus-send part controls Spotify (which wouldn't listen to standard media
# keys for some reason)

# Ctrl + Scroll Lock => play/pause
"xte 'key XF86AudioPlay'; dbus-send --print-reply --dest=org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.spotify /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.PlayPause"
    Control + Scroll_Lock

# Ctrl + PrtScr => previous song
"xte 'key XF86AudioPrev'; dbus-send --print-reply --dest=org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.spotify /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.Previous"
    Control + Print

# Ctrl + PauseBreak => next song
"xte 'key XF86AudioNext'; dbus-send --print-reply --dest=org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.spotify /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.Next"
    Control + Pause

# Screenshots (BTW check out scrot, it's a really awesome and simple screenshot
# program)

# PrtScr => screenshot
"scrot screenshot.png"
    Print

# Menu => screenshot with area selection
"scrot -s screenshot.png"
    Menu + Release
```
`xte` *is a program for simulating keypresses in X11, while* `Menu` *refers to that
"right-click equivalent" key found between your right Windows key and Control.
At first* `Menu` *wasn't willing to cooperate, but in the end,* `Release` *finally got
it to work.*

# Testing
To check how your config behaves, `xbindkeys` offers a non-daemon mode which
will exit as soon as you hit `Ctrl+C`:
```shell
xbindkeys -n
```
*If you happen to have an instance of* `xbindkeys` *already running, kill it
before starting any more.*

# Activating the bindings on system startup
Unfortunately, `xbindkeys` doesn't run automatically on startup.  The easiest
way to fix this is to use your desktop environment's autostart
capabilities. In `i3` - my window manager of choice - you'd just need to add one
line to your `~/.i3/config` file:
```shell
exec "xbindkeys"
```

# Questions?
Feel free ask them in the comments or see the [xbindkeys
manpage](https://linux.die.net/man/1/xbindkeys).
